# Proof by Cases

<div class="def">

**Proof by Cases**: *In proving a mathematical statement \\(P(x) \implies Q(x)\\) where \\(x \in \mathbb{S}\\), sometimes \\(x\\) has more than one dijoint property. It may be helpful to separately prove \\(P(x) \implies Q(x)\\) for each different property of \\(x\\). This is called **Proof by Cases.***
</div>

Examples:
* For \\(n \in \mathbb{Z}\\), \\(n\\) is even **or** \\(n\\) is odd.
* For \\(x, y \in \mathbb{R}, x \neq 0, y \neq 0\\), \\(xy > 0\\) or \\(xy < 0\\).
  * alternatively.. 
  * \\((x > 0 \text{ and } y > 0)\\) or \\((x < 0 \text{ and } y < 0)\\) or \\((x > 0 \text{ and } y < 0)\\) or \\((x < 0 \text{ and } y > 0)\\)

**Result 3.15**: If \\(n \in \mathbb{Z}\\), then \\(n^2 + 3n+5\\) is odd.

**Proof**: Assume \\(n \in \mathbb{Z}\\).
* Notice that \\(n\\) can only be even *or* odd. If we prove the theorem for both cases, we've proven the theorem generally. Let the conclusion guide you!
* The parity of \\(n\\) is relevant only because the parity of an expression depending on \\(n\\) is relevant.
* **Case 1**: \\(n\\) is even, so \\(n = 2k, k \in \mathbb{Z}\\).
\\[
    \\begin{align}
        n^2 + 3n + 5 &= (2k)^2+3(2k)+4+1\\\\
        &= 2(2k^2+3k+2)+1
    \\end{align}
\\]
  * So \\(n^2+3n+5\\) is odd.
* **Case 2**: \\(n\\) is odd, so \\(n = 2k+1, k \in \mathbb{Z}\\).
\\[
    \\begin{align}
        n^2 + 3n + 5 &= (2k+1)^2+3(2k+1)+5\\\\
        &= 4k^2 + 4k + 1 + 6k + 3 + 5\\\\
        &= 4k^2 + 10k + 9\\\\
        &= 2(2k^2 + 5k + 4) + 1
    \\end{align}
\\]
  * So \\(n^2+3n+5\\) is odd. \\(\blacksquare\\)

## An even-ness - oddness tale:
<div class="def">

**Parity**: *Let \\(x, y \in \mathbb{Z}\\). \\(x\\) and \\(y\\) are of the same **parity** if both are even or both are odd. Otherwise, \\(x\\) and \\(y\\) are of opposite parity.*
</div>

**Theorem 3.16**: let \\(x, y \in \mathbb{Z}\\). \\(x\\) and \\(y\\) are of the same *parity* \\(\iff x+y\\) is even.

* If you're trying to prove a theorem based on \\(x\\) and \\(y\\) and *it doesn't matter which is which*, this is referred to as the theorem being *symmetric in \\(x\\) and \\(y\\)*. This means we can swap \\(x\\) and \\(y\\) and the conclusion doesn't change. We refer to this as "Without Loss of Generality", or "**WLOG**".

**Theorem 3.17**: let \\(a, b \in \mathbb{Z}\\). \\(ab\\) is even \\(\iff a\\) even or \\(b\\) even.
* Backwards: Assume \\(a\\) is even or \\(b\\) is even.
* We want to show that \\(ab = 2a, a \in \mathbb{Z}\\).
* WLOG, assume \\(a\\) is even.
  * So \\(a = 2k, k \in \mathbb{Z}\\).
  * Observe: \\(ab = (2k)b = 2(kb)\\).
  * So \\(ab\\) is even.
* Forwards (by contrapositive): Assume \\(a\\) is odd **and** \\(b\\) is odd.
* \\(a = 2k+1, b=2j+1, k, j \in \mathbb{Z}\\).
* Observe:
\\[
  \\begin{align}
    ab &= (2k+1)(2j+1)\\\\
    &= 4kj + 2k + 2j + 1\\\\
    &= 2(2kj+k+j)+1
  \\end{align}
\\]
* So \\(ab\\) is odd. \\(\blacksquare\\)